The thing about Stalin's terror is the
police are also murdered while they are
doing the murdering. You're murdering
your intellectuals, your scientists,
your cultural figures. You're murdering
your loyal party elites and the whole
thing doesn't collapse. The people
around Stalin can see that he is
unusually good at dictatorship. He is
just carrying this entire system on his
back through thick and thin, liquidating
the kulocks, collectivizing agriculture,
building a military-industrial complex,
defeating Hitler in war. How much better
are you going to do than Stalin? Stalin
goes into the underground and for 20
years of his life, he's a penniless,
jobless revolutionary dedicated to
fighting the genuine injustices of the
Zarus regime. what he'll produce is a
much more unjust regime than the one
he's fighting against.
My guest today is Steven Cochen who is a
senior fellow at the Hoover Institution
and author of twothirds of his three
volume Stalin biographies. Um the first
one Stalin paradoxes of Power, the
second one Stalin waiting for Hitler.
Thank you for coming on my podcast.
Thank you for the honor of the
invitation.
Let's begin with the SARS regime. So
first question, how repressive was the
Sarist regime actually? Because
presumably the motivation behind the
revolution is to get rid of this
autocracy. But you just have these
examples of these Lenin's brother tries
to kill the Zar and he himself is
writing these long manifestos about
taking down capitalism and overthrowing
the government and him and people like
Stalin are just in exile in Siberia
living off government money um robbing
banks small shenanigans. Honestly, it
sounds more forgiving than uh many
countries today. So how how bad was it
really? So you have to put yourself back
in the time period to judge the level of
repression based upon what norms were,
what other regimes did rather than take
the 20th century regimes as the guide
and go back. But we need to widen the
aperture a little bit here. So this is
the Zarus regime's problem.
It needs to be able to compete in the
international system. That means it
needs a modern military and modern
industry to underwrite that modern
military. So it needs armaments, it
needs steel, it needs chemicals. For
that you need workers.
So you want the workers
only to work in the industry. You don't
want them for example to have a labor
movement or to go on strike or to have
ideas about how politics should be
organized. Similarly with the
intellectual side, you need the
engineers.
You need the engineers in order to
design and build the modern attributes
that you need to compete as a global
power. But you don't want those educated
people to have their own ideas and
values about politics, about whether
you'd want an autocratic government like
the Russian regime has, or you'd want
some other type of government. So all of
these countries in the modern period
have this dilemma importing
modernization
but keeping out the political side, the
value side that goes along with that.
So they need to have some way to repress
and control the working class
organization movement stuff and the
university educated intellectuals.
That's a problem we still have today.
The Iranian regime now has that problem.
The Chinese regime in Beijing has this
problem. The Soviet Union had that
problem. Contemporary Russia has that
problem. How do you bring in modernity?
meaning you have tanks, you have
airplanes or you have AI but keep out
for example separation of powers,
freedom,
property rights,
all the things that undermine your
dictatorial rule. So the Tsarist regime
was a quintessential example of this
fundamental dilemma.
So modernization is not a sociological
process that kind of just happens. It's
a geopolitical process. you modernize
because you need to compete in the
international system. So if somebody has
ships made out of steel, you either have
ships made out of steel or they're going
to show up at your door like we did to
Japan and tell you that they're in
charge. Now,
I thought this was one of the most
interesting takes in your uh first
volume that modernization is this is not
this inevitable process but is
instigated by this ruthless geopolitical
competition. Do you think that that
still applies in today's world? Because
yes, there are pockets of conflict in
the Middle East or in Ukraine which
would motivate the key powers there to
want to have modern militaries and
modern technologies. But through most of
the world, the odds that if France falls
behind technologically, if their AI is
worse, that Germany is going to take
over is just sort of unthinkable. So
this this dynamic where in order to ward
off colonization or other great powers,
you need to stay at the cutting edge of
technology and also have the up-to-date
political processes. Is that still a
drive which moves countries forward?
If you have an autocratic regime, it is
existential for you every day. So you
want to compete. France can compete or
fail to compete and its political system
is not at risk.
No one's going to say the regime is
illegitimate because someone else beat
them in AI.
Students are going to protest in the
streets. That's not going to mean that
the regime is going to fall. There may
be a change of government, but the
system remains.
You have this dilemma for the
authoritarians. So you think about Peter
the Great. I need to compete against the
great powers. So I need to have a navy.
To get a Navy, I need to have the
industry that supports a Navy. I need to
have the officers. I need to have the
technical skills. And so, I need to have
all of that to be able to compete. But I
have this autocratic regime. So, how do
I retain the social structure, the
hierarchy, the non-elected,
non-legitimate in some ways based upon
modern understandings of constitutional
order? How do I retain that while I'm
importing these attributes of modern
power? So that's the stuff that persists
today for Iran, right, Russia, China,
North Korea. So they have to get very
good at holding at bay those attributes
of modernity that threaten their
political regime while importing as much
as they can of the attributes. But it's
two sides of the same coin. The thing
that gets you the engineers also gets
you the possible political ideas. And so
the Tsarist regime begins to repress the
very thing it needs to compete in the
international system. It represses the
working class and it represses the
engineers and the intellectuals without
which it can't be a great power without
which it can't compete but with which
its political system is threatened. So,
so the amount of repression is an
important question.
We would call this a vegetarian regime
compared to the carnivores like Stalin's
regime or Hitler's regime in terms of
the degree of repression. But the
dynamic of being compelled to exercise
repression against the very people you
need like oxygen, that's the dynamic
that we see in Tsaris, Russia
and that we still see today in a certain
form. I was thinking is one of the key
lessons from your volumes that you
should be tripping over yourself in
order to embrace a lesser of two evils
and whether that applies through all the
examples you give and this is maybe a
general question about how much can you
actually learn from history because for
every seeming lesson there's an equal
and opposite lesson that you can also
learn. So during the Tsarist regime in
retrospect we can say that the liberals
and the constitutionalists should have
cooperated with Stoian or White and even
though it was an autocratic regime they
were actually doing these real reforms
and uh there was growth and they should
have continued that process or when the
government falls in February that in
1917 they the provisional government
faction should have united to oppose the
Bolsheviks. But then there's all these
other examples in Germany. The
conservative Weimar government is allies
with Hitler in order to fend off what
they think is a greater evil, which is
the communists. And given the events up
to that point, it's a reasonable concern
to have uh given what the Bolshik had
done in Russia. So where where should we
end up on this? Should you embrace the
lesser of two evils whenever you get the
chance or no? So the Zarus regime is
undertaking this repression of people
who have legitimate claims
and that repression is quite severe by
the standards of the day. Okay? It's not
going to be everybody murdered or
everybody deported to the waste of
Siberia, which we're going to see in the
20th century when we have a different
level of uh communications and
transport, different technology, when we
have a different level of ideological
commitment,
but still it's highly repressive. It's
totally unjust and the claims of the
people protesting are legitimate. Yeah.
And so Stalin goes into the underground
not because he's looking for power. It's
because he's dedicated to fighting the
injustices of the Tsarist regime. And a
lot of young people like him do the
same. And so he he's in the seminary.
He's highly successful, unbelievably
successful. He's great at school. Uh
that's been true uh for many years now
since he was in elementary school. sang
in the choir, good grades, did his
homework. So, he's on track to be
successful in the society. He gives it
all up. He starts reading forbidden,
otherwise censored underground
literature and books,
and learns about the social injustice,
not just through firsthand experience,
but analytically.
and he never graduates the seminary
which is the highest level of education
that was available to somebody in the
caucuses because they don't have a
university because the Zarus regime is
afraid to allow a university. They need
the university graduates but again
they're afraid of the politics of it and
universities elsewhere including in the
capital St. Petersburg are constantly
being shut down through these
revolutionary episodes. So he goes into
the underground and for 20 years of his
life he's got no job, no profession,
no source of income. He's in and out of
prison, in and out of Siberian exile,
constantly harassed by the police. If he
escapes, they find him, they put him
back. So from the ages of about 17 18 to
the age of late 30s he's a penniless
jobless revolutionary dedicated to
fighting the genuine injustices of the
Zsarist regime. What he'll produce is a
much more unjust regime than the one
he's fighting against. So this is known
as perverse and unintended consequences.
He's legitimately dedicated to
revolution as he understands it in his
day and it's fighting against legitimate
injustices. But the way he does that,
the revolutionary methods that he uses
and then the regime that he ends up
building turn out to be worse than the
problem that he was addressing. This is
perverse and con. So your question is
about whether revolution is a good thing
ultimately even if the injustices are
there and whether there could have been
some solution that was more evolutionary
that could get you to a better place. So
the constitutionalists otherwise known
as the cadetses we would call them the
classical liberals.
They're the private property
constitutional order anti-autocracy
people fighting the Zarus regime.
They're going to be the protagonists of
the February revolution in 1917.
And it looks like they could possibly be
the solution. Yeah.
Because they're against arbitrary
autocratic unjust rule and they're in
favor of constitutional order.
That's not how they behave once they're
in power. But let's leave that aside.
But here's your problem. And this was
foreseen by the interior minister who
puts down the 1905
rebellion revolution.
uh Pota Doravo
who understands that the liberals, the
constitutionalists, classical liberals,
the ones who want private property and
constitutional order pro probably if
they had their brothers a constitutional
monarchy like you have in the UK and
Britain at the time. But Doravo says to
them, you guys are fools because if you
take down the Zar, you won't get a
constitutional order. You'll get chaos
and anarchy and you'll get a massive
social revolution by the peasants
predominantly but also by the
nationalities and the workers and you
will bring on the opposite of a
constitutional order. So instead of
fighting against Thesar, you should
throw in your lot with Thesar against
the Stalins and the social movement that
came from the investment in
modernization.
Right? And so Dorovo has proved right.
He's proved right not just in Russia by
the way. In many places in the world at
the time between like 1905
and 1925 or so 1926 in the case of
Portugal you have constitutional
revolutionary attempts attempts to
introduce constitutional order.
Mexico,
Iran,
China, Russia, Portugal, and they all
fail. The constitutionalists
take power for a brief period of time,
and then they're swept out by a more
leftist, more socialoriented
revolutionary process. And so, the
constitutional epoch of the early 20th
century turns out to be a bust.
It had to have happened beforehand.
So before the modern era, why?
Because when you instroduce
constitutional order like in England, in
the US, to a certain extent in France,
which has a more complicated process,
you do it before you're in the mass age.
You do it before the working class and
the peasantry are politically organized.
So you're able to introduce rule of law,
constitutionalism
based on a private property model where
not that many people get to vote. The
franchise is restricted. The vast
majority of people can't vote. Only
property holders can vote or only men
can vote, not women. And so you have
this restricted franchise which is like
a breathing space for you to introduce
and get used to a liberal constitutional
order that you can then democratize over
time. So over time non-propy holding
males get to vote. Over time women get
to vote. Over time slaves become
citizens. They become people and fully
fled citizens. And they also get to vote
and to own property legally. So you have
this order that has all of these birth
defects. It's it's very restrictive in
the franchise. Some people are slaves,
not even people. And yet over time you
can get that right because the category
citizenship and the constitutional order
are already embedded. When you have the
constitutional revolution in the mass
age and when you have the peasants and
the workers and those for national
self-determination participating in the
constitutional revolution,
constitutional order, rule of law isn't
enough for a lot of them.
It worked in Taiwan and South Korea.
There was a era of industrialization
under not a dictator but an
authoritarian government and then they
were able to transition to uh rule of
law democracy. There are these
exceptions which have turned out to be a
false normative or guiding stars for us
in every case.
So it happened in West Germany and
Japan.
Yes.
Under American occupation.
Enormously successful. We turned
Hitlerite Germany into our ally with
their cooperation. It's just
astonishing. and then Hirohito Japan and
the emperor state and then Japan's two
former colonies South Korea and Taiwan
it worked there as well. Hong Kong was
on that trajectory until it was turned
back when the lease ended to the
communist regime in Beijing. But the
number of countries that have done this
is very very few. Now
the opposite has happened in most other
cases where you've gotten an attempt but
a failure to introduce enduring
constitutional order in a mass society.
But there is a paradox here where if you
institute this sort of uh revolution or
changing of the guard during the mass
age then you're going to get this sort
of leftist revolution which is uh very
antithetical to future prosperity and
ruler law. But on the other hand, if you
don't have a changing of the regime, you
you will fail to be able to so it's been
pointed out that Shank Kaishek when he
did have control over China should have
done some amount of land reform and you
talk about how Stoen after the 1905
attempted to put in this sort of
agricultural reforms but their success
was mixed because the existing
aristocracy obviously didn't favor the
so there is this paradox of if you don't
change the regime the existing
stakeholders will not want the kinds of
reforms which would make it possible to
have a lower class that's bought into
the system?
How do you bring the whole society, what
we would call the masses or what used to
be called the masses? How do you bring
all levels of society into a political
system as citizens? How do you build a
polity which is inclusive of people
regardless of how much property they
have? And how do you then provide
opportunity to them so that they can
rise up the ladder? Right? That's the
secret of success in the modern world
which a handful of countries have done
from a non-democratic
starting point and which other countries
have done from democratizing a liberal
constitutional order. So go back to the
Tsarist regime. What were the options
for the Tsarist regime? You have this
very heavy absolutist regime. Autocracy
is even a more absolutist version than
we had for example in the French case
when the Borbone dynasty could say the
state is me or the state is I right
where you have this Versailles like
absolutism and aristocracy that forms
around the absolutism and is the main
beneficiary and most everybody else is
excluded from the political process and
they are going to break through at some
point. So how are you going to manage
that breakthrough? Again, in the French
case, it took more than a century to get
this right, where the monarchy is the
the monarch is killed and the monarch
comes back and they have an emperor and
they have a constitutional order and
they have an elected president who does
a self coup and one republic falls and
another republic takes his place and
eventually even the Vichi regime, a Nazi
occupation regime that overthrows the
the the republic, right? And so it takes
de Gaul in some ways from above to
reimpose a republic, the fifth republic
later on. So it's a very difficult
process even when it works as the French
case tells you. So we're not saying that
it's simple and easy and that Zorus
Russia could have gone down this path. A
lot of people say, well, if it hadn't
been for the war, Zorus Russia was on an
evolutionary path. it was modernizing
economically. So it might have been a
kind of Taiwan story over time where
the dictatorial regime gave way under
economic success and political pressure
to a more benign regime and they
institutionalized a rule of law, private
property, civil liberties, inclusive
polity for everybody. And the problem
with that is that the autocracy refused
to do that. The autocracy wanted no part
of any evolutionary process. So in 1905
when the Zsar the Zsarist regime is
compelled under pressure of tremendous
peasant revolt and worker strikes and a
defeat in the war against Japan when
they're compelled to introduce some
version of constitutional order a kind
of quasi parliament quasi constitution.
Thesar regrets doing this almost
immediately and is trying to push back
against his concessions once the lid was
put back on because of repression once
Dorneo
repressed successfully
the political movement the zar wants to
undo those concessions and go back to
being an autocrat and autocrat after
means a self power a power unto itself
and so this is your challenge. How do
you undo the autocracy and get to an
evolutionary mode when the autocracy
itself is committed to
not allowing any political participation
whatsoever. And so you have the the
leftist version of overthrow where you
end up with a radicalization in the
leftist direction and you have a
rightist version of overthrow where you
end up in a kind of oh we're not going
to have Leninism here. Let's prevent
Leninism. Let's go with the radical
right. So the traditional right invites
as happened in the German case and
earlier in the Italian case invites the
radical right to power thinking they can
control the radical right the fascism
the Nazism the traditional right is
wrong the radical right once it's
invited to power institutionalizes
itself so you get a leftist version of
this and a rightist version of this and
then they're kind of uh codependent
where each uses the threat threat of the
other to further consolidate their
dictatorship. So this is the 20th
century version. The irony here is that
you got the radical right, the fascist
solution in the German case and you got
the radical left, the socialist solution
in the Tsarist case. The Tsarist regime
had a massive radical right. They had
the protocols of the elders of Zionism
that infamous tract anti-semitic tract
which then makes its way to Germany but
originates in the Tsarist Empire. So the
anti-semitism is there the right-wing
movement is there implanted in villages
the union of the Russian people. Russia
has the fascism before Germany. Germany
has the largest socialist party in its
parliament in the sense that it's not a
majority but it's a plurality. The
social democrats in Germany are
enormously successful at the ballot box
and the right-wing movement with the
anti-semitism is enormously successful
in the streets in Tsarist Russia. So if
you were alive before 1917 1933 you
would predict that the socialism would
be victorious would triumph in Germany
and the fascism would triumph in the
Russian Empire. But it's the opposite.
Yes. And so that's just a fascinating
amazing paradox that I tried to deal
with.
You say that in 1917 a leftist
revolution of some kind was inevitable
but that it didn't have to be the
October Bolevik revolution. So why why
was leftism inevitable in Russia at that
point?
You put your finger on a big part of it
when you talked about Chiang Kaishek and
land reform. Mhm.
You have this peasant land hunger. And
so the peasants
are often without their own holdings.
They work on someone else's property or
their holdings are so small that if
there's a little bit of bad weather, let
alone a massive drought,
they're on the verge of starvation. So
subsistence level agriculture is not
politically stable. So you want a a
class of people kind of yman capitalist
property owners who can expand their
farms and can succeed and hire labor and
some of those hired hands can then get
their own land and become a version of
these yman farmers sort of Thomas
Jefferson style or Stipen the great
attempted reform of Stipen after the
1905 revolution which ends in his
assassination.
So you need to deal with the peasant
land hunger so that it becomes a
stabilizing political force because the
peasants get the land and then they have
a piece of the status quo and they want
to retain the system versus the peasants
don't have the land and they want to
overthrow the system to get the land. So
in the Russian case there is a the end
of surfom in the 1860s again as a result
of the the defeat in the Crimean war
where there is a reform they free the
surfs emancipation of the surfs but the
surfs don't get the land to the degree
that could have happened because the
land owners are the political support of
the zaristtocracy
so to take the land away from the land
magnates and give it to the peasants is
to go through this risky path where
you're losing
one political support, the land owners,
before you've fully gotten the new
political support. So, you're going to
go through this valley of hell
potentially where all bets are off and
you're not sure if it's going to work.
So the peasants don't really get the
land as they could have in the 1860s and
it becomes a problem that's not resolved
right through 191718.
So the peasants have their own
revolution in 191718
which is not about the socialist
parties. It's not about the boleviks.
It's not about Lenin. It's about the
peasants seizing the land. But that
creates an intense radicalism that
becomes the platform for the socialists
in the cities to gain and hold power in
the system. So you don't have that in
the German case. In the German case, you
have strikes and seizures of power in a
few places like Bavaria for example. You
have a Bavarian Soviet Socialist
republics, but they're easily put down
by the forces of order or the army. And
guess who's in the army? The peasants.
So you don't have a peasant army ready
to put down the revolt in the Russian
case because the peasant army is the one
seizing the land. It's the one doing the
radical revolution. So you lack the
forces of order to destroy the leftist
movement in the Russian case because it
is the leftist movement in the Russian
case which should be the forces of
order. And in the German case and to a
certain extent the Italian case which
happened simultaneously and there's also
a Hungarian case here where you have
leftist revolts in the cities seizures
of power like the Paris commune of 18771
which happens in Paris not in the rest
of France and you need a peasant army
that has a stake in the existing order
to undo the city leftist revolution. And
so you have this in the other European
cases. In one case, you don't have this
in the Russian case. Then you're going
to get to the Chinese case later, which
is going to be a variant of what
happened in the Russian case where you
have a gigantic landhungry peasantry
that's going to become radical for a
time. Again, there are going to be
perverse and unintended consequences.
The peasants are ready to destroy the
existing order, not to bring communists
to power, but to seize the land
themselves. So in the 1920s, the
peasants are de facto, not the jury land
owners. They don't own the property in
law. They own it in fact. But then
Stalin's going to reverse the peasant
revolution violently and reinsurf or
enslave the peasants across all the 11
time zones, this gigantic Eurasia. And
the peasant revolution is going to be
annihilated in blood. And so the
peasants have through their radicalism
of seizing the land have helped bring
Lenin and his boleviks to power in the
cities which is going to be the death of
the peasants owning of the land. and
instead the reinsurfment of the peasants
and something similar is going to happen
in the Chinese case. So again there's
this irony of history perverse and
unintended consequences. Stalin is
fighting against zarist injustice only
to impose worse injustice and worse
bloodshed and worse repression. And the
peasants are fighting on behalf of
obtaining the land only to then be
expropriated and forced into these
collectives and losing the very land the
land that they took in the seizures that
brought these leftists to power in the
case. So in central Europe, the southern
German case, the Northern Italian case,
the Hungarian case, you don't have the
endurance of the leftists in power.
They're all thrown out. They're thrown
out by the forces of order. They're
thrown out by the right. And so the
traditionalism of the peasants where
they believe in God. They believe in law
and order is is overriding because they
already have a lot of the land in
comparison to their Russian or Chinese
counterparts. And so they can be part of
the forces of order. And so you can get
fascism in Central Europe. You can get
the right-wing dictatorships in central
Europe, the forces of order destroying
the left, whereas you get the leftist
dictatorships in the giant peasant
societies where you don't quite have the
distribution of land. Now, the peasants
are complaining about land distribution
in Italy and Germany, don't get me
wrong, but relative to Russia and China,
they're doing well. So then you think
about the Mexican case, the Iranian
case, the Portuguese case, all of which
are peasant societies as well. So
there's how you integrate farmers. The
whole world order rests on the back of
farmers. How much farmers till means how
rich or poor your country is. Whether
you have a surplus as we call it that
the farmers can sell on the market after
they consume what they need for their
famil family's purposes or not tells you
how much wealth you have to then build
an army build modern industry etc. So
the world order rests on these
hardworking
predominant in the population
peasantries and in some ways the
political system doesn't derive in
deterministic fashion from them.
Politics still matters and politics is
never reducible to social relations. But
failure to master or mastery of the
social relations of the peasant land
question is fundamental
in some of the political outcomes. So
the politicians have to be good at
managing the peasantry's integration
into that society where you're trying to
get an order in the mass age. You're
beyond where just the court society at
Versailles, the Tsarist court in St.
Petersburg,
right? or the the men at the
constitutional convention in the US or
the
right
the the people who are the dis you're
beyond that in the mass age and you have
to be able to incorporate the masses
somehow in a polity and it's really hard
to do and so this dynamic of failure to
master or mastery over it it tells you a
lot about the direction you're going to
go
this answers one of the other questions
I had for you which is why did we see
these communist resolutions in peasant
countries which was the opposite of
Marx's prediction that you would first
need capitalism and industrialization
before you would see the turn towards
socialism. And I guess the answer is
that the private property which is
engendered by uh capitalism
industrialization actually helps the
peasants more or helps them somewhat and
buys them into the system. But this
raises another question which is if it's
the case that all of this unrest is
caused by the mistreatment of peasants
in China in Russia you have the
mistreatment of them to an extent
unimaginable after the collectivization
in 1928 where they're literally 100
million peasants are enslaved and of
course there's some lack of cooperation
with the regime. they kill half the
livestock and uh and so forth, but it
doesn't break the regime, even though
it's way more repressive and uh and
destructive than any of anything thear
did. So, if the peasants are the
backbone of the regime stability, why
why why doesn't collectivization in
China and Russia break the regime?
Yeah, terrific
questions of again. So, you have a
multi-progged answer. Let's do it this
way. On the one hand, you have a much
bigger repressive apparatus.
Much much bigger repressive apparatus.
So the Tsarist regime has a very small
secret police. Really small. The secret
police for the Tsarist regime is mostly
following the uh handful of
intellectuals. Right? You have a few
thousand university students in Tsarist
Russia in the mid- 19th century when
5,000 or so when when this term
intelligencia gets invented and you're
going to have a few thousand more over
time but you're in the thousands not the
millions of
can even there though like Lenin Trosky
and Stalin they go off they're sent into
exile but they're not only living off
government money but while in exile
they're writing for Pravda they're
writing you know here's my manifesto on
the fall of capitalism. So even the
intellectuals are not really
sense of repression is more about
following what they do rather than
arresting them on a pretext and pull it
putting a a bullet in the back of their
neck. So you have this Zara secret
police the Aanka that's the porative
nickname for them the Aanka. They're
tasked with following these
revolutionaries and infiltrating their
groups and maybe sabotaging them from
within. Something similar happens in the
labor movement where you have this zubat
of Sheena is the the Russian term where
you plant the leader of the workers
movement
in order to make sure that it's
controlled by the secret police rather
than has a spontaneous or autonomous
uh version that could get out of hand.
So you have a small police that's
dedicated to surveillance and
infiltration.
you're reading their mail, which by the
way is something that's invented in
France. The the black cabinets are are a
French invention that the Zsara secret
police borrow.
And so you're following them and a lot
of them get deported to Siberian exile
like happened to Stalin. Some get forced
into European exile like happened to
Lenin. Lenin for 15 of the 17 years
between 1900 and 1917
is in European exile. He's not even in
Russia. And and in fact, the Paris
branch of the Zara secret police, the
Aranka, the Paris branch which conducted
the surveillance and infiltration in
Europe. We have that entire archive
right here at the Hoover Institution. It
was supposed to be destroyed. The the uh
order went to destroy it in Paris after
the revolution. And instead, the guy put
it on a boat and secretly had it shipped
it here to the United States. And so now
we have the Tsarist Russian archive
secret police for the foreign revol the
revolutionaries in foreign exile. So you
have surveillance and infiltration on a
lower level. The main force of
repression in Tsarist Russia is the
army, not the secret police. You don't
have a gigantic armed secret police. The
secret police are kind of intellectuals.
They're reading Lenin's tracks and
they're writing summaries like AI would
do now about what they contain and how
to combat it and why the idea is wrong.
They're sort of like pseudo inellectuals
or in some cases intellectuals with
degrees.
They're not the thugs, the torturers and
the thugs that we would associate with
secret police that's built under Stalin
in order to enact the reinsurfment, the
enslavement of the hundred million
peasants. It's that act. It's a kind of
chicken and egg thing where how do you
enslave the peasants without the
gigantic secret police, but then when
you enslave the peasants, the result is
you have this gigantic secret police now
that can do everything and anything. So,
it's a process where the chicken and egg
are happening simultaneously and they're
building the secret police capacity
while enslaving the peasants that they
didn't have.
Can I ask about that? How do we explain
this surplus of sadism
uh during this period in Russia where
the 25,000ers who Stalin recruits to go
out to the countryside and steal from
basically starving people uh and they
can visibly see I'm sure that you know
they're stealing from a family that's
going to starve without this grain. You
have tens of thousands maybe hundreds of
thousands of interrogators and torturers
in this goollock system. They must know
it's a cynical thing where they're
making them confess to a thing that they
haven't done and they're employing
torture to do it. It wasn't just Stalin
doing all these things. There were
hundreds of thousands maybe millions of
people including if you include
informants probably millions of people
who were implicated in this whole
ghoulish regime. So is this just a
latent thing that is true in any society
and Stalin was able to exploit it or was
some circumstance uh created this level
of um
again it's fantastic question. So we get
this from Lev Copalev Education of a
True Believer. He was one of these
people. He later then becomes a
dissident. He gets forced into exile in
Germany. He's a Germanist as by
profession. And he writes this fantastic
memoir, a couple of memoirs, but one of
them is called Education of True
Believer, which covers how he was the
one who did this, including in his
native village.
So here's your answer. On the one hand,
there's ideology and the importance of
ideology, right? We may think that no
one really believes the ideology, that
the ideology is too ridiculous. It's too
disproven by facts in life.
We're too smart and they couldn't have
been as stupid. They had to be smart
like us and not believe these crazy
fairy tales about. In fact, it's wrong.
They do believe the ideology. And
they're young. They're young people. And
so, a story of the evil of capitalism.
You have World War I, millions of people
die. Like for what? Why are those
millions of people being killed? The
flower of European youth and then many
colonial armies get drawn in because of
European imperialism.
Young people, the future of those
countries go to their senseless debts.
What's that about? It's about
imperialism. It's about capitalism. And
so that's evil. And we must overcome
that. And so there's a way in which life
experience as well as the the fervor of
youth. Let's build a new world today
rather than wait for tomorrow. Let's be
impatient. Let's eradicate capitalism.
Let's bring about socialism. Let's bring
about socialism meaning end war and
imperialism.
Achieve abundance for everybody so that
it's not just the halves and the have
nots, but everybody's got something. And
in the process, let's make my little
life world historical. So here I am,
just a little activist with a red star
on my cap. And my life means nothing
except if I'm a participant in building
a new world in a world historical
process that's going to end
exploitation, that's going to end halves
and have not. But do you think that
those gen I get if you're a middle
bureaucrat in uh in the communist party?
Sure. Do you think that explains the
motivation of an interrogator and a
gulag they were like oh this is part of
the end goal of communism?
There's a big story here which is about
how we're building a new world and there
are people against that because they're
the boogeoisi or they're the fools who
are doing the boogeoisi's business on
behalf of the boogeoisi. Right? They're
duped into false consciousness.
But in many of these cases, they know
that it's they're the ones orchestrating
the sort of show trial, the cynical game
where they know that they just picked up
a random person in the dead of night.
They know that there are enemies out
there. They know that this process has
people who are against it. That's a
given. Who are the people who are
against it? You see, they're masking
their true feelings. They're hiding
behind professions of loyalty. when in
fact when the hour of crisis comes and
there's a war they will be the saboturs
behind the lines
the fifth column and so it might be that
some of them are innocent that you're
arresting but some of them are clearly
going to be guilty as well and so to get
the guilty you have to somehow manage to
deal with you're victimizing people who
are likely innocent and you may know are
innocent But you also know to your bone
marrow that some people out there are
enemies. It's hard to identify and find
them. So you're overcompensating a
little bit to make sure that you get
every last enemy. Again, it's a crazy
idea to us.
It makes no sense to us. But a lot of
things make no sense that people believe
in,
right? So, there's this young kid who's
really adept at social media who just uh
looks like he won the primary for a
Democratic candidate for mayor in New
York City.
And one of the things he wants to do is
freeze rents, rent control,
because he wants more affordable
housing. So, he's a complete idiot in
in terms of facts,
right? Because the way to get more lower
rent affordable housing is to build more
housing.
Right?
If supply massively increases
and it exceeds demand, the price has to
go down. It's proven again and again and
again. And what rent control does or
freezing of rent, it inhibits the
building of new housing because who's
going to build new housing when you
can't make money off of it. So rent
control is what produces the lack of
affordable housing in the first place.
So he sees this the what's the problem
as the solution now. Now is he a fool?
No. He's a really bright guy. He's very
well educated. He's he's read everything
and anything. He's been to university.
He's talked to a lot of really smart
people. And you'd say, how could he be
so foolish to believe an idea that's
obviously falsified by empirical
reality? But again, it's an ideological
belief. He wants to allow people who
can't afford Manhattan to live there.
And that's a good idea. Life should be
more affordable. There should be more
places like Queens where you can come in
as immigrants or you can come in as
lowerass front end of the of the social
ladder like my family did for example.
My father worked in a factory and you
should be able to get some housing for
your family, work hard and rise up. I
agree with that 100%. But he's got an
ideological approach to how to achieve
that which to me is completely foolish.
And if I were as smart as him, how could
he possibly hold that idea in his head?
But so ideology is pervasive.
It's pervasive. Flying in the face of
empirical reality. We could give many
examples. I'm not picking on this guy in
New York. It's just a recent example. I
don't know him. I've never met him.
Whatever. Maybe there's a a more
complicated story there. I'm just saying
that we have to take ideology seriously
because it's deep and it can be enduring
even in the face of empirical reality.
Um there's ideology but there's a very
specific thing to these Marxist regimes
where they might believe in class
conflict and you need this revolution
and so forth. But there's also this
sense of you you cannot contradict the
party. You cannot contradict the
vanguard. So even in 1924 when Trosky is
getting condemned by the party or
whatever that was and he he's um he gets
up to give a speech to the party plenum
right and he says look uh for all of my
thoughts let me there be no mistake that
the party is always right and party
discipline is always important so
there's not not only the sense or I
think uh Mani would say oh I want these
specific policies implemented but the
sense that also loyalty to the party and
eventually to Stalin
even when it seems to contradict my
understanding of socialism is absolutely
paramount. And one way to explain that
is that they were just genuinely afraid
of Stalin and they thought this was
antithetical to their understanding of
communism. Or another is that like part
of the ideology is this theocratic
understanding of the party's always
right even if it seems like a single
individual is manipulating it to their
ends.
Why is Marxism,
Marxism, Leninism especially, so
attractive to young people and to
intellectuals? Why? We have this history
which is a bloody mess. Millions of
people die and they die because of the
enactment of this ideology.
How could people continue to adhere to
an ideology like that during the
murderous time period and even more
after the murderous time period when we
can look at it dispassionately?
Here's part of the answer. Again, young
people are attracted to
impatient, quick, total transformation
of the world, eradication of war,
eradication of social injustice. And
there's a simplicity to the ideal. It's
kind of a total package.
It gets rid of everything bad just if
you do if you follow the precepts.
And so, sure, things happen that
shouldn't have happened. There are some
surprises. There are some downsides. But
are you pro- capitalism? Are you pro-
imperialist war? Are you pro landowners
having all the land and and and the have
nots having nothing? So there's this
constant threat where if you contravene
the ideology, you're in bed with the
very evils that the ideology is trying
to overcome. So you become an accomplice
in the persistence of the things that
you're dedicated to overthrowing. So
it's not just that you're loyal to the
party, you're loyal to the outcome that
the party is dedicated to achieving. And
you know that there going to be mistakes
and costs and bad things happen along
the way. But hey, is imperialist war
better than that? No. The answer is
imperialist war has got to be worse. And
so I got to but the other reason which
is even deeper than that is because
Marxism Leninism empowers the
intellectual class and the lumpin
intellectual class. You see, in a market
system,
you get to do what you want. You want to
open up a family business, you want to
take a loan and give it a try, you can
do that. Nobody can stop you. Now, it
might be that it's hard to get the loan
in some neighborhoods. It might be that
the loan interest rate, you got to work
much harder than you thought, etc. But
you get to make the decisions. You get
to decide what to do, when to do. You
can work for somebody else. You can put
out your own shingle.
In these kind of systems,
it's the intellectuals and the lumpin
intellectuals who make those decisions.
They use the state as an instrument to
overcome the injustices of the existing
society. Again, the injustices are real,
but that empowers them to be in charge.
So the beauty of Marxism, Leninism and
why the what we used to call the third
world loves this is because they get to
be in power. It empowers them across the
board. They get to make the decisions on
the economy on and they don't have to
submit to elections. They don't have to
have a mandate. They don't have to
legitimate their rule beyond the
ideological building of a new world of
overcoming injustice. So what we see
again and again is young people being
impatient for evil to end but also
empowering themselves to be in charge.
They love the state. They love the state
as an instrument for social justice,
social engineering.
They love to empower themselves as the
decision makers because after all
they're the intellectuals. They've
studied the theory. They know better
than others. workers and peasants and
the downtrodden the lower classes they
sometimes have false consciousness. They
don't understand
why, for example, we have imperialist
war. They get sucked in. Bread and
circuses fools them. They have this
false consciousness. But I know better
and I can be in charge and I can get us
to a better place. Even along the way,
bad things are going to happen. Some
people who are innocent are going to die
or be arrested. But with this is the
march of history. This march of history
is is to peace and justice. And who is
going to stand in the way of that?
Especially when it empowers you
personally. So that you could never do
this in the private sector. Nobody could
afford you this kind of power in the
private sector and in a in a
decentralized political system, in a
federalized political system where
nobody accumulates that much power.
Social engineering is always coercive.
Always coercive. The issue is how much
of the coercion is necessary
that we accept in the tradeoff to write
some of the things that are obviously
wrong.
All the anti-Marxism I totally agree
with. But I still think um from a purely
just like analyzing the system there's
many ideologies and you know you have
this uh line that you often have that
look you can't explain Stalin by saying
that he was beaten by as as a kid or
he's a Georgian or whatever because many
other people are Georgians or beaten as
a kid and they turn out not this way.
There's many different kinds of
ideologies and very few of them end up
as amenable to dictatorship as Marxism.
And you also another thing that's really
confusing here is that all of these old
boleviks who abed the system and who
eventually stalin purges uh they're
whatever you might say about them
they're not weak men right they were
they were willing to face down the they
were able to organize uh the revolution
against the um and they're willing to
live in exile to potentially get shot by
the orang I guess not shot by the oranka
but you know whatever they're willing to
go through hardships for their beliefs
So you might think well okay they might
just go along with Stalin's doing
because this serves what they think is
the end goal of communism but we know
that after Stalin died Kruef who is one
of the key people in the regime gives a
secret speech where he says that no
Stalin was going he was um he was
destroying the building of socialism and
the building of Marxism Leninism so
people did believe that Stalin is
actually uh going against this end goal
that they have at least crushev believed
that and there's also the in many cases
they themselves are being implicated and
they know they're innocent. And in many
of these cases, there's this period in
between when they're a dead man walking
because Stalin has started putting, you
know, the Met feelers out that this
person is a Troskyite or something, but
they're still in their positions of
power. They're still the head editor of
Pravda or in charge of the military or
something. And it's mysterious why these
people who they're not cowards. they
were able to organize a revolution
against Assar are not using this period
of um you know a chicken with its head
cut off in order to organize some sort
of defense of themselves maybe the next
time they have the party plenum instead
of just say confessing or giving the
obligatory um speech where you're
castigate yourself you just say no I
think Stalin's leading the revolution
wrong I'm going to die either way but I
might as well say this same thing
happens in China when he's a dead man
walking the premiere under Mao during
the cultural revolution he doesn't use
that opportunity to go up to
there are very few but there are some
people like that
and they're arrested and executed all of
them very few of those kind of people
are going to survive the ones who
publicly decry the failures of the
system and its perverse and unintended
consequences the ones who decry the
dictatorship as opposed to the freedom
that Markx predicted would happen right
there are some people like that they're
extremely courageous they're known to us
not the only one, but I feature some of
them in my book. But again, you're
creating a new world
and it's going to be messy because it's
about class struggle
and class struggle means they're going
to be winners and losers. And the
boogeoisi have to go. They're inherently
evil. They're an evil class. They have
to not just be retired to a farm
somewhere. They have to be eradicated,
liquidated as a class. And so they're
going to resist and therefore they're
going to be enemies everywhere.
And again, you're not going to know who
they are. So are you on the side of the
enemies?
But what about the cases where they're
implicating themselves? They know
they're not an enemy, right?
But again, the party is larger cause
than they are. You're building a new
world. Your life can contribute to that
or not. and it's insignificant
ultimately.
What fraction of confessions by high
level party members do you think were
not coarse out of a sense of fear of
their own lives or their family's lives?
Well, not I guess they knew they were
going to execute it so it would have to
be for their family's life or to avoid
torture versus in order. It was a very
sort of um Aussymandian like I will I
will sacrifice myself for the uh
so we're in the level of psychology here
DK.
Yeah. And it's it's human psychology is
a complex subject. Figuring out human
psychology is a big challenge even with
everything we know now, let alone what
we knew then. So it's it's
simultaneously everything and anything.
We have to get rid of the binaries
where,
you know, they
didn't believe they were cynical and
they sacrificed themselves because they
were cowards or because uh they knew
that they were forced to make that
sacrifice to preserve some of their
family members or whatever. There are
elements of belief and elements of let's
say suspension of disbelief
and elements of cynicism and knowledge
and understanding simultaneously in
almost everybody. They coexist. We think
of them as contradictory but humans can
hold contradictory thoughts
simultaneously without too much trouble.
We could give many examples. You've had
people like that on your show for
example, right? So the psychology is not
as surprising in some ways. What's
surprising is that it s this whole thing
succeeds.
It doesn't collapse of its own internal
contradictions. It doesn't undermine
itself. If you're murdering
a high percentage of your upper officer
corps, if you're murdering your
intellectuals, your scientists, your
cultural figures, if you're murdering
your loyal party elites centrally and in
the provinces, and if you're murdering
the police who are carrying out all of
these murders, the thing about Stalin's
terror is the police are also murdered
during the terror. while they are doing
the murdering. You're doing all of that
and the whole thing doesn't collapse. To
me, that's more interesting in some ways
than the complexity of human psychology
that holds these contradictory thoughts
and fails to go for self-preservation in
some cases or fails to say, "I'm going
to die anyway. I might as well go down
fighting or whatever the metaphor might
be." And so the fact that the system is
able to undergo this level of
selfdisruption
and come out the other side, that's
pretty astonishing. So Hitler does not
murder his upper officer corps. He
doesn't like them, he retires them and
they get a pension. He doesn't murder
the glighters or the Nazi party
officials. He doesn't murder the
intellectuals. Some go to prison. Some
go into exile if they're lucky.
And some definitely are executed often
for acts that they've committed
sometimes just because they had an enemy
in the system who wanted to enact
revenge against them.
But for the most part, Hitler is
attacking what we would call his real
enemies.
That is to say, people who are opposed
to his regime, either in thought or in
action or both. Stalin is attacking
those people, but he's also attacking
loyalists. He's taking down in really
big numbers system loyalists, people who
would walk through fire for him. And one
of the things they do is to walk through
the fire of their self emulation on
behalf of the cause. And this belief in
the new world, in the better world, in
transcending capitalism,
in getting peace as well as abundance on
the planet, in building paradise on
earth needs to be understood as
absolutely fundamental to everything
that we're talking about. We often talk
about Nazi racial ideology.
How could they believe that stuff? That
stuff is obviously ridiculous. You say
right Gerbles who helped enact the uh
regime's ideology about a master race
had a had a several deformities
right club foot walked in a brace and
yet he's helping preside over the murder
of people because they are disabled.
They're singled out solely for their
disabilities to be sent to the gas
chambers or to be sent to imprisonment.
And he's one of them. And so we say, you
know, could he really have believed
this? I mean, wasn't he a cynic enacting
this?
Because how could he not understand
that these are real people because he's
one of them,
right?
And the answer is, well, yes, he was a
Nazi.
These people were communists and he was
a Nazi and there were a lot of them and
they had doubts. They suffered bouts of
doubt. A lot of events contradicted the
official ideology.
Innocent people, innocent family members
themselves, innocent went to the
gallows, got the bullet in the back of
the neck. And so you say, "God, this the
belief they couldn't have believed this
stuff." And yet they did. The main thing
that we know from the archives
that were formerly secret that we get
into when they're declassified is that
the Nazis were Nazis
and the Communists were communists. So
here we have this problem with
socialism. Socialism means many
different things, right? A communist
party is building socialism. Why?
Because their view of the world is
feudalism, capitalism, socialism,
communism. So first they have to destroy
capitalism to get to socialism
and then socialism can eventually get
you to communism. So the communist party
must first build socialism. How do you
build socialism? It doesn't exist. So
how do we know what it looks like? How
do you get there? They don't know. The
only thing they know is it's not
capitalism. So let's destroy capitalism.
That will be the step to get us to
socialism. So capitalism has markets,
we'll have planning. Capitalism has
private property, we'll have state
property or collective property.
Capitalism has bajgeois parliaments
where they vote and they claim it's
democracy, but it's only for the
property holding bajgeoisi. So we will
have a dictatorship of the proletariat.
Right. Everything capitalism has wage
slavery. Right. That is to say,
real slavery.
Exactly. But everything is eradicate
capitalism to get you to socialism. It
turns out that that doesn't deliver
freedom. It doesn't deliver prosperity
and it doesn't deliver peace.
It delivers massive stization
because once you eliminate private
property and individual choice, the
state is now responsible for everything.
And it delivers ration tickets and the
goolog. So you get a bunch of socialists
that break from this. They say, "You
know what?
Lenin is wrong.
Eradicating private property, markets,
civil liberties, and parliament is a
mistake.
We have to accept
private property, markets,
capitalism, and parliaments
because that's the only way to get to
freedom. Otherwise, you get to the
Leninist dictatorship, total stization,
goolog, and ration tickets.
These people are denounced as
revisionists like Edward Bernstein in
Germany for example, the Swedish social
democrats.
They say we accept capitalism, markets
and private property. We want to
redistribute the income because it's
tough for some people to make their way
in the system. The system produces
inequality and let's make it more equal
with social engineering redistribution.
But we keep capitalism, we keep markets
and private property and we keep
democracy, voting, rule of law, etc. And
we'll evolve towards full socialism and
eventually communism. But we will not do
it the Leninist way. And so there's this
huge break in the socialist movement
between those who are real
revolutionaries and want to overthrow,
eradicate capitalism to get to the just
and prosperous and peaceful future and
those who want to use the existing
system and evolve,
embrace and accept it. So the left has a
civil war, a civil war on the left,
which is still going on between those
who say capitalism is evil and must go
versus capitalism has a lot of problems,
but we need it in order to have peace
and prosperity, in order to have
freedom, and we just need to manage it
better, redistribute.
And so this civil war on the left which
arises in real time the critics of
Lenin's revolution the German social
democratic party people like Bernstein
and the rest of them they are critics in
real time of this and and yet
some of the critics who are what we
would call the social democrats of
Europe Lenin was also a member of the
social democratic party of Russia but
the communist thing makes this divide
between those who are serious about
destruction of capitalism and those who
are quote revisionist
term.
What happens is some of the people who
are in the revisionist camp begin to
flirt with the capitalism is evil
analysis.
And so they begin to truck with the
communists that they've broken from and
are in civil war with. So you get
left-wing social democrats who are
closer to Lenin than they are to
right-wing social democrats like
Bernstein and the rest who are pro-
capitalism but pro- redistribution.
And so this is confusing to people
because not everybody is a communist.
Some people like in Sweden accept
private property and markets. But some
of the people in Sweden seem to go back
on that promise of accepting it and
arguing that if we don't get rid of
capitalism, we're we're still going to
end up with an evil system. And so this
civil war on the left never gets
resolved. It's ongoing. And the right
uses this confusion to paint everybody
as anti- capitalism. And the left gives
them ammunition by talking about the
evils of capitalism. even when they've
come along to accept private property in
markets. And so you have this really
deep and fundamental problem for the
left, the tragedy of the left that it's
never able to overcome even to this day
where it comes out and says no more
anti- capitalism ever. That is over.
That leads to death, bloodshed, goolog,
ration tickets, war. That actually is
worse than the solution than the
original problem it diagnosed.
Think about Markx. Markx says you get
rid of private property, markets,
capitalism, you're going to get freedom,
you're going to get abundance. You don't
get that. And then people say, "Oh, you
know, but Marx wanted freedom. He didn't
want Stalin's dictatorship." So, it's
not Marx who's the problem. It's Stalin
who deformed Marx. We see this argument
all the time. Stalin is a deformity
whereas Marx was about freedom. So think
about a nuclear bomb. You're going to do
a nuclear bomb. You're going to nuke a
population, but you don't want to kill
any people.
Your goal is to nuke them, but nobody
dies. That's what you say. You're going
to get rid of capitalism. You're going
to nuke them, but instead everybody's
going to live. And you give that order
to your generals. You say nuke him, but
everybody lives. Nobody dies. So they
nuke him and everybody dies instead of
everybody living. And you say, you know,
I never said to kill the people.
I said that they should live.
But once you nuke capitalism,
you're going to lose freedom. You're
going to lose the ability to have
politics. You're going to end up with
some version of a Leninist system. And
the ideology is going to drive that to
the doubters. And then you're going to
get a second wind where you get Cruchef
like you said. He comes into power. He
denounces Stalin's crimes. He doesn't
praise capitalism, private property, and
markets. He doesn't undo collective
farms. He doesn't undo state ownership
of property. He doesn't undo the
planning system. He just undoes Stalin's
personality.
He's trying to subtract. The
dsttoalinization is take away Stalin.
It's not take away any of the other
attributes of the system. And so it's a
second wind that it was Stalin who was
the problem, not the system that was the
problem. So here we have the experience
of going through the horrors,
then having those horrors publicly
denounced
within the party. The secret speech is
not published in Soviet newspapers, but
it's discussed at party meetings in all
local. So within the party, there's a
public dimension to this. All party
members become familiar with Kruef's
denunciation of Stalin.
So they experience the horrors in many
cases firsthand. They enacted the
horrors in many cases themselves.
They then see this denounced as horror
and they get facts that they didn't
know. They get a big picture view back
onto this and instead of saying, "Oh my
god, this system is evil. We made a big
mistake. We have to undo state ownership
of property. We have to undo collective
farms. We have to undo the
dictatorship." Instead of saying that,
they say, "Oh, we get a chance to do it
right this time without the evil Stalin
who messed it all up." And so the Kruev
thing, the revelation of the horrors,
the denunciation of the horrors,
ironically gives you the second wind
belief in the system that's going to
last right through Gorbachev, who's a
Kruev era baby. We have this with Xi
Jinping.
If you know the story of his father and
of his own upbringing, they suffer
massively through Mao's regime and the
cultural revolution. They're purged.
They're humiliated.
And yet, instead of saying, "This system
is horrible. If I ever get power, I'm
going to undo this system, which was so
unjust to me and my family." Instead of
that, they say, "Let's make this better.
Let's not have the bad things that
happened under Mao, but let's keep all
the good things, supposedly good things
that happened, including the Communist
Party monopoly, because that to us looks
like the problem and it wre havoc in
their lives and their family's life, but
to them that's the solution. And so this
is a paradoxical element of communism
where its failures don't become
discrediting for so many of the people.
They instead become a kind of second
wind once you acknowledge and denounce
them. So it's never the system at fault.
It's Stalin at fault. It's never the
system at fault. It's Ma's mistakes or
excesses as they're called that are at
fault.
Lighthouse is the fastest immigration
solution for people building technology.
When I worked with them to help me
secure a visa for one of my employees,
the difference was clear throughout the
whole process, starting even with the
initial intake form. While most
immigration firms require you to
schedule a meeting and pay hundreds of
dollars just to start discussing your
visa options, Lighthouse only needs a
LinkedIn profile or a resume to evaluate
your eligibility for a ton of different
employment visas like the EB1A or the
O1A. You take 60 seconds to fill out
some basic information and they'll put
together a document for you for free
which is fully comprehensive. They'll
list out all the potential paths
available to you and how strong of a
candidate you are for each one. Also, if
you decide to move forward, Lighthouse
can take things all the way to the
finish line, building out your story,
preparing your application for you, and
moving things forward faster than you
would have thought possible. If you've
ever even considered working in the
United States, I really encourage you to
reach out. You're probably more eligible
for a visa than you realize. Go to
lighthousehq.com/getstarted
to find out. All right, back to Steven.
I guess in China's case, they actually
did reform the system and didn't just uh
they didn't uh just discredit the
cultural revolution. They said no, the
whole the much of the planning and uh
state enterprises was a mistaken idea.
But I do have a different question.
That's not exactly the the way you
described. You have a point. You're on
to something DK,
but there it needs to be qualified. So
what happens in Dong Xiao Ping's case is
the communists have accidentally
that is unwittingly
not accidentally unwittingly destroyed
the planning system.
Y
they have sent down to the village
people who do economic planning. They've
sent them to manual labor. They have
smashed them in the face because they
wear glasses in many cases and therefore
they're putitively intellectuals and so
they've undermined their ability to
continue the economic system as they had
it.
But if that's the reason why they
weren't able to do planning, shouldn't
Stalin's purges and then World War II
have also had the same effect on the
Soviet Union?
Not the political system. Dong Xiaoping
never
takes down the political system. or the
ideology. And so you still have today
the communist monopoly. Communism can
fail at everything. It can starve the
people.
It can um kill the people. It only has
to do one thing to survive. Suppress
political alternatives. So during that
resistance, peasant resistance to Stalin
in the collectivization episode that you
referenced earlier, there's no political
alternative. There's no other place for
them to go and say we don't like the
injustices of the Zarist regime and we
don't like what communism is doing.
Therefore, there's something else that
we can go to that's an alternative.
Communism has suppressed all the
alternatives. So, it's either return to
Tsarism or keep communism,
right?
And so, and so in the Chinese case, you
have something quite similar. They allow
economic liberalization
in part because they have no choice, but
they don't allow political
liberalization. Right?
And so they're able to quote reform by
enabling the people to generate wealth,
jobs, prosperity through market
behavior, and it's mostly the peasant
class in China, which then leads to
family-owned businesses, which then
leads to larger businesses. And so
society, not the party, creates the
miracle in China. and the party tightens
its grip because the ideology of the
party is when the socioeconomic base has
a lot of market in it, it's a threat to
the party's rule. So the party has to be
even more vigilant against the
capitalists in the society. And it turns
out that you get to Jang Zamin who is
Dang Xiaoping's handpicked successor
and Jang Zamin sees that the private
sector is becoming dominant in the
country and that the party's monopoly on
power is under threat and Jang Zamin
decides he's going to do something
called the three represents.
He's going to bring the millionaire
capitalists into the party. He's going
to make them party members. Yeah.
So instead of the party being against
capitalists, the capitalists are going
to join the party and this is going to
somehow increase the party's leverage
and control and transform the psychology
and behavior of the capital. Of course,
it fails.
Instead, the party members
are in cahoots with the millionaires and
they begin to form their own businesses
by expropriating other people's
property. and the party begins to go
dissolute in an anti-Marxist fashion in
terms of private property wealth
accumulation. So Xi Jinping comes along
predictably. He looks at Jang Zamin's
solution, co-opt the millionaires into
the party, sees that it failed. Not only
did it fail to transform the behavior of
the private sector people, it infected
the behavior of the party people. So
he's going to instead of bringing the
capitalists into the party, he's going
to force the party back into the
capitalism. So he's going to push the
party into the private sector more
strongly than it was before. Board
directors, party officials, CEO,
party official,
private sector people who don't
cooperate, destroy them, make examples
of them, including in the tech sector,
so that people get the message that the
party is the boss here. So you have a
kind of natural progression where you
open up the system economically
in order to drive jobs, prosperity,
wealth because you've destroyed people
say the Communist Party brought 700 800
million people out of poverty. No, the
Communist Party put those people into
poverty.
Why are a billion plus people in
poverty? Because of the party's rule.
It's the people themselves. They lift
themselves out of poverty. And so the
communists have to reassert their
control, their Leninist monopoly on
power because the very thing that has
rescued them, the diligence,
entrepreneurialism,
ingenuity of the amazing Chinese people
and of that society is now a threat to
communist rule. that I mean I agree with
uh the the mechanism by which the growth
happened but I I don't think it's the I
don't think it's the case that it was
their inability to have true Marxist
communism which uh uh which led to
liberalization. I mean if you look at
the um the creation of these special
economic zones the imperative at the
national level that you must have growth
uh and then deng southern tour and so
jung he tries after the tnmen to clamp
down on these prot uh clamp down on
opening up and dung says no we must open
up if you don't we'll remove you all of
that is a is a sort of positive I maybe
positive is the wrong word but um
policy driven
yeah It's it's um
it's a special effort you have to make
towards economic liberalization. It
didn't just happen by default. People
really had to push for it because the
alternative story which seems you're
saying is no. It was just that they
physically could not enforce communism
anymore.
That's how it started DK. So let's let's
go look at the facts.
Why do you have a special economic zone?
Why can't every zone have market?
You're
doing this grudgingly.
This is a grudging allowance of certain
behavior. So you look at the decrees.
You can trade onions, but you can't
trade potatoes.
Okay, you can trade potatoes, but you
can trade only on Tuesdays and
Thursdays, not Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday.
You can only have three employees at the
rise corporation.
Yeah. So the decrees are all grudging
with very few exceptions and the society
is forcing more and more concessions
onto the ideologues in the Marxist
Leninist system.
Right?
So at the beginning it's launched by the
party's grudging acceptance that the
society is going to rebuild and not
starve through its own right uh hard
work. So they've been through a couple
of famines here. I mean really big
famines. They don't have the state
capacity to reimpose the system
immediately in the economic sphere. So
they grudgingly make concessions,
very few but some in the market sphere.
Gradually that expands over time as more
and more
uh people push against the systems
restrictions. And so it's a policydriven
story in part but not as the lead. It's
a policydriven story as the following of
the entrepreneurialism and the hard work
of the societ.
But that push back must come from is
coming from within this is your thesis
in univil society, right? That it is
coming from within the system because
they could have I mean North in 1976
they're like North Korea literally and
North Korea still exists, right? There's
no reason um
North Korea doesn't have the cultural
revolution where it annihilates its
state capacity in a Mauist frenzy in
order for Mao to in his mind undo his
rivals, unbalance and destabilize them.
They have
Yes, they do. But they still have the
mechanisms of economic control and they
have a massive black market. You got to
remember that the communism doesn't have
legal markets for the most part. It has
restricted legal markets again
grudgingly household plots
but for the most part it has a lot of
illegal market activity including in the
state sector. So the state sector gets
an order to produce certain numbers of
large quantitative output for the
military-industrial sector but it only
gets allocated 25% of its ball bearings.
So it has to assign its supply
department on the black market to go out
and find the other ball bearings that
it's not assigned from central planning.
So you get a massive black market in the
system, not just at the level of little
people in the village, but at the top
level of the military-industrial complex
to make the system work. So when market
behavior is grudgingly accepted, that
what that does is it brings market
behavior out of the shadows into a legal
or quasi legal realm. So you're not
inventing market behavior from scratch.
You're surfacing it in some ways. And so
party officials and industrial
officials,
they have market behavior in their firms
to grease the system and to meet their
output.
I agree with their general point that
how any nation gets wealthy is not by
the government but because of the thrift
and entrepreneurialism and hard work of
individuals. But that's also true in
western capitalist countries. In those
countries, we also have a lot of stupid
policies. And
as we sit here and speak
when we say America is a capitalist
country what we say is like the
government or you know all the
bureaucrats they'll they'll try to put
in all these regulations and it's only
grudgingly that they will um aced to you
know we could point to a bunch of stupid
policies in America where like they try
to outlaw the potatoes and the onions
but they they only they could only
outlaw the potatoes equivalence things.
So any capitalist society quote unquote
is just a case where the government had
to ac
[Music]
countries in the west for saying like at
least the government wasn't maximally
stupid. Um
fair point DK fair point we often
um exaggerate the role of policy in all
realms because we do policy ourselves or
we talk to policy makers. We have a bias
towards the causality of policy. So
America is 25% of the global economy
since 1880.
Yeah.
We've had no income tax. We've had
income tax. We've had high income tax.
We've had low income tax. We've had
tariffs. We've had fewer tariffs. We've
had all sorts of regulations. We've had
deregulation.
For 150 years more or less, we've been
around 25% of global GDP, which is 5% of
the population through every imaginable
variety of policy regime.
That doesn't mean that policy is
inconsequential.
It matters for a lot of players in the
system. It matters for those who get the
policy turned in their direction, the
subsidies or the tax breaks or the the
taxes on their competitors or whatever
it might be. A lot of gaming of the
system and it does matter. But in the
larger picture of things, you can't
create the wealth of the United States
over those 150 years, that global
economic dominance, and you can't
strangle it in the policy realm. You can
affect it but you can't either create or
straighten it. And so we have to
understand in the communist sense that
incentives matter. We know that. And so
when you create incentives for officials
to increase GDP and to increase job
creation and that's how they get
rewarded, you're going to get a lot of
that behavior. And the party will do
that not immediately. remember
immediately they're kind of flat on
their back and they've had this gang of
four and Dao Ping has come back from
having been purged and they're on the
verge of another potential famine and
and per capita GDP under Mao is $200
during the cultural revolution. $200 is
the annual per capita GDP of a billion
people and or or slightly under. You
think that's insane, right? That's where
all the people are in poverty when I was
saying the regime put them in poverty
and so they're a little bit flat on
their back which creates an opening and
it creates this grudging dynamic of
we're going to hold power and we're
going to allow the economic
entrepreneurialism to take place but
we're going to control it.
We're going to control it with special
economic zones.
In any country in the world today where
there's a lot of poverty, the reason the
poverty exists is also because of policy
and the extent the uh the extent the
poverty has been removed, it is because
some combination of human capital and
policy got less stupid. So if we're
going to complain about a country like
um there's many poor countries in the
world like Bangladesh being poor, uh the
country which just does it less maybe
we're going in circles here. A different
question I want to ask is
No, you have a point. We're we're not
disagreeing,
right?
I'm just trying to say that we give too
much credit to the Communist Party
for what's happened in China and not
enough blame for what's happened in
China.
And this is part of the dynamic of us
seeing communism as potentially
successful. So we criticize these fools
who thought that the Stalin regime was
not going to kill them, was not going to
produce famine. And yet we have this
narrative that the Communist Party
produced an economic miracle in China,
which
I'm sorry, the Communist Party took
advantage of the economic miracle in
China, played a part in the e-
expropriated the hard work of many
people, stole the businesses. A lot of
those local officials just stole the
land and stole the businesses from
people who created a success. This is
the thing that the party did that's
really important. Dunia Ping first went
to Japan in early 79 before he came to
the US and met Carter. Put on the cowboy
hat, that gigantic 10gon hat that was
bigger than he was. Uh he was like five
gallons, the hat was like 10 gallons. He
goes to Japan and you're looking at
Japan DK and it lost the war. It was
actually literally incinerated in the
American use of atomic weapons.
It was destroyed. It lost the war. And
it's rising to be the second largest
economy in the world. Like what
happened? How was that possible? How
could Japan rise from the ashes
literally when China won the war? It was
on the winning side,
right?
And it's $200 per capita GDP. And Dang
Xiaoping looks this over and he says,
"You know what the answer is? Japan is
partners with America, not with the
Soviet Union." And so Duncia is going to
divorce the Soviet Union
economically
and he's going to marry the US.
And so Dong gets most favored nation
status in 1980 thanks to Jimmy Carter.
Communist regime in Beijing gets most
favored nation status which has to be
renewed every year and is renewed every
single year until 20201 when they're
admitted to the WTO.
That's a Clinton initiative that that
that happens right when when Bush is
going to come to office.
And so the secret sauce is you have to
manufacture and export to the American
domestic market because the American
middle class is insatiable. They will
buy anything as long as the quality is
high and the price is low. Japan did
this. Japan's two former colonies,
Taiwan and South Korea, followed in
Japan's footsteps. China's gonna do
this, too. We're going to use this
Japanese model and the American middle
class and their insatiable
overconumption
is going to create the Chinese middle
class. So this is what this is what the
party does. This geopolitical
reorientation
from a Soviet economic model to a Japan
style export-led partnership with the US
domestic market and middle class. They
have a couple of tricks that are really
important. They have Hong Kong.
Hong Kong is a British controlled rule
of law international financial order
that allocates capital based upon risk
and return, not communist party
dictates.
Gorbachov, Soviet Union, they have
nothing like Hong Kong. The only reason
China has Hong Kong is because after
World War II, when Truman announced that
Chiang Kai-shek and the nationalists
were going to accept the Japanese
surrender in Hong Kong,
the British sent their boats in and took
Hong Kong back themselves.
So that when Mao defeated Chiang
Kaishek, he didn't have Hong Kong. The
British had Hong Kong and they created
this international financial system that
Mao's successors would be able to use.
Had the British not done this, there
would be no Hong Kong and there would be
no Chinese miracle in the D Xiaoing and
after period. The other thing they have
is they have overseas Chinese who know
the culture, speak the language, and are
going to do the FDI again routed through
Hong Kong. So you have Taiwan. So,
ironically, the failure to win the civil
war 100%.
We think of the Korean peninsula as
divided. We think of there's partition
of the Korean peninsula, but China is
also partitioned. There's also Taiwan
still partitioned to this day. And
Taiwan is the FDI that's going to come
in through Hong Kong routed through into
the special economic zones on a
riskreward capitalist market basis, not
a communist basis. And furthermore, they
have the Japanese war guilt because the
Japanese committed those atrocities in
China. So the Japanese are going to make
up for what they did by helping rebuild
China. again the FDI and the tech
transfer like it's coming from Taiwan.
So Taiwan and Japan, this partitioned
China and this guilty, you know, the war
guilt through the British Hong Kong is
going to go into the special economic
zones, manufacture things like the
Japanese and then export them to the
American domestic consumers and it's
going to be t-shirts and right
at the beginning and then they're going
to cl like the Japanese and then they're
going to climb the value chain until
it's the highest value added products
and then supply chains. are going to
change as a result and nothing is made
in one place anymore and the world gets
very complicated. But the point being is
that Dang Xiaoping did that. That was
intentional.
That's the credit that the party
deserves and the party never gets
because it's a story not of the party's
rule alone but of British Hong Kong
globalization,
Taiwan, Japan, United States domestic
market. And so how do you get rich in
the modern world? you sell to America.
Those countries that are partners with
America and that are able to compete.
The Chinese deserve credit. They can
manufacture higher quality, lowerc cost
products that American consumers will
buy. American consumers are not forced
to buy Chinese products. They're just
better and they're cheaper and so they
buy them because it's a market and
there's competition. So some countries
in Bangladesh can do this in textiles.
You referenced Bangladesh which is how I
got launched on this revery uh that that
that I hope is now ending. My point
being is that the East Asian miracle
which is Japan
selling to the American domestic market
followed by South Korea and Taiwan doing
the same trick and then followed by Dang
Xiaoping's communist China. the same
exact trick filtered through British
Hong Kong. The problem with the Chinese
one is that they're not allies, former
enemies who were allies like Japan. They
are former allies who are now enemies
who have done this magic sauce and now
we're in the the pickle that we're in as
a result of this. But the formula is
this is where the communists deserve the
credit that they never get whereas they
get credit for things that they didn't
do.
Yeah. Suppose Stalin had lost succession
battle in 1924 and somebody else is in
power but he's still on the central
committee or the poly bureau
and um it's 1930 and suppose the other
person is also in this way ruthless and
is one by one getting rid of every
single person in the inner circle. What
would a Stalin type figure have done if
he found himself on the periphery of
somebody else's regime? So
counterfactuals are really critical for
historical thought.
A lot of historians are pedantic about
this and they say we're against
counterfactual. It's just speculation.
But every single one of them is a
practitioner. Why?
If you say that Stalin
caused collectivization,
that means without Stalin there's no
collectivization. If you say Hitler
caused World War II, you're doing the
counterfactual. You're saying no Hitler,
no World War II.
And just to put a finer point of my
question, I mean, not just in the sense
of whether collectivization would have
happened, but more in the sense of how
would he personally have avoided the
fate of Bkarin and Kamv and Gov in terms
of he potentially I'm gonna get purged
someday. I'm I don't want to be the toad
to somebody else. How would he
personally have navigated the sort of
power struggle at being what Gov was to
Stalin or was Stalin?
This is a question about how do you
become Stalin? Could there have been
another Stalin besides Stalin?
Yeah.
A lot of people will argue that you have
this formative period when you're
growing up, your parents, your
schooling, the influences of your peers,
and you become a certain personality.
part of it is genetic and then a lot of
it is the environment and you have this
then personality and so you have to
understand how the person formed whether
it's Picasso as a painter or Stalin as a
dictator and and then if you understand
their personality you'll understand what
they do in power
right
the problem with that analysis is Stalin
is not Stalin when he first gets into
power it's the experience of being in
power that makes Stalin stall Stalin.
It's the building the dictatorship
within the dictatorship and it's the
enacting that kind of power that makes
Stalin who he is. It's sitting in that
chair.
It's being in the Kremlin running a
Leninist regime and being responsible
for Russian power in the world against
Nazi Germany, the UK, the US.
So people say about Xi Jinping now, you
know, Xi Jinping, he's made a lot of
mistakes. If he had just kept a Dong
Xiaoping's policies, China would be much
better off,
right?
We'd be still in a kind of dant or
partnership with China and instead we're
at loggerheads and there's potential
war. The problem with that analysis is
what would Xi Jinping have done if he
were the number one guy under Deng
Xiaoping instead of Dung? Maybe he would
have done Dung's policies just like Dung
did. More importantly, what would Dung
do if he were alive today instead of Xi
Jinping? Would he do what Dung did in
the 80s and 90s or would he do what Xi
Jinping is doing today? In other words,
how much is the personality and how much
is the system? How much is formation
before you get into the position of
power and how much is the circumstances
and responding to those circumstances
and the exigencies of the moment and the
the way the system operates and the
place the system is and what the larger
context in the world looks like. So here
you have a communist party seizes power
and as I said unlike the case of
Bavaria, southern Germany, Northern
Italy, uh Hungary, it holds power. It
doesn't just seize power. The Paris
Commune 18771, they seized power in
Paris and then they they were destroyed,
put up against the wall and shot. So
they seize and they hold power, but
they're in this peasant country and the
peasant has the land de facto and
they're Marxists. So they believe that
the base, the socioeconomic base, the
class relations determine the
superructure or the politics, right?
Marxism, the base, the socioeconomic
base gives you the superructure.
Politics depends on it's an outcome of
what the base is. So you have a de facto
capitalist base.
Yeah. And I don't mean like whether they
would have done collectivization. I mean
like how would he personally because he
wants to be power.
I get that. So he makes this decision.
All of them want to get rid of
capitalist relations in the countryside.
Every single one of them want to do
that. They're all communists. They're
all Marxist Lenists.
But they don't think it can be done.
They think if you try it, you'll fail.
So he goes and tries it. He creates even
more destabilization than they had
predicted, but he just powers through
and gets there to the end and succeeds.
And most of them are grateful that he's
pulled this off because they thought it
couldn't be done.
So your question is, who else could have
become Stalin in that position? Who else
among the Marxist Leninists could have
been the guy who says
whether we can do this or not, we have
to do this because we can't have a
socioeconomic base that's capitalist and
the communist regime will survive.
They were all ready to say that, but
they weren't all ready to do that.
Moreover, after he does it, they had
criticized him during the process while
he was doing it. He was the only one in
his mind who was Marxist Leninist enough
to get it done and they were all carping
at him.
So this is where you begin to see the
paranoia suspicion being magnified where
he then in a few years after
collectivization is more or less
finished, he's going to go after them.
So you needed a person who could have
felt in their head that this was not
only necessary but doable. undertake
those risks, power through no matter how
much famine and resistance and upheaval
and criticism there was, and then come
out the other side of that as the victor
with this gigantic secret police that
was really small but got really big in
the process of doing the very thing that
people said you couldn't do.
and then
having all of that and not destroying
any rivals and going from dictatorship
to despatism. Right? So you would need a
person
who was capable of being stolen in that
in that group, not from outside that
group, but inside that group and then
would either not use that power to
destroy everybody else, not yearn for
desperatism, but be satisfied with
dictatorship where others exercise power
and their domains
and yet still able to hold on to the
system.
So was there such a person in the circle
and could if the answer is no could that
person have emerged in the process of
doing
I guess my question is slightly
different which is that um even if such
a person did not exist and suppose like
Stalin already exists he did all the
stuff and it's 1934 and um you know it
seems like Stalin's starting to go a
little uh great terrory soon um and
another copy of Stalin is in the pallet
bureau
And just out of a sense of
self-preservation, they're like, "In a
couple of years, I don't want to be
writing my own confession and ending up
in the goolog." Is Stalin being the sort
of power player that he was and knowing
how to align factions against uh each
other to his own advantage in the very
end? If he if he if somebody like him
was in the poly bureau, what would they
have done? Or was were they already
there and there was just nothing they
could do by this point?
This is a question for every single
dictatorship. Why didn't somebody just
kill Stalin?
Yeah,
he was going to kill them, kill them
all. Why didn't they just kill him and
save themselves?
So during the 20s, Stalin resigns six
times.
Yeah.
Three times in writing and three times
orally between 23 and 28. And every time
those guys around him beg him to stay,
right? So, not only do they fail to try
to push him out, but when he himself
volunteers to go out, they beg him to
stay. And then he kills all of them
within 10 years. Every one of them just
with a few exceptions is dead. And so,
gez, what were those guys thinking? It's
clear that Stalin was not Stalin yet.
If they knew in the 20s that in the 30s
he was going to murder them all, maybe
they would have acted the way you said.
So, he becomes Stalin in this process.
He's not Stalin yet.
That's a really important argument that
I make in the book.
But today, you look at Putin. Putin is
ruining Russia.
Why doesn't somebody just assassinate
him?
Xi Jinping. He's hurting China. He's
making China enemies everywhere around
the world when China was until recently
popular. China was 75% favorable
globally. Now it's 25% more or less
favorable globally. That's Xi Jinping's
doing. How can the elites around him let
him do that? Around Putin, the people
are falling out of windows. Instead of
falling out of windows themselves, why
don't they push him out the window?
Kame in Iran,
right?
He's brought ruin on the country. Why
don't they take him out and try to save
themselves and save the country, not
just themselves? In other words, be
patriotic as well as
as self-s survival. And the answer is it
rarely happens. One, you have a
collective action problem.
But sorry, why doesn't this prevent
thesar is like people are trying to kill
the zar constantly. They're killing
Russian ministers in the zarist regime.
And I think you in the
Hitler there are more assassination
attempts on Hitler, some of which come
very close,
than by Stalin,
but never against Stalin. Why is that?
Stalin is the guy who is building and
personifying the system. the the people
around Stalin can see that he is
unusually good at dictatorship.
He is just carrying this entire system
on his back through thick and thin,
killing enemies,
liquidating the kulocks, collectivizing
agriculture, building a
military-industrial complex, defeating
Hitler in war. I mean, how much better
from with the systems logic, not from
humanity's logic, not from the point of
view of the kind of values that you and
I share. How much better are you going
to do than Stalin? And so, there is a
way in which
they're pygmies and he's Stalin. So, of
course, they know that they can't do
what he does. And if they try to unseat
him, they might save their lives, but
they might lose
the system
and the radiant future, the overthrow of
capitalism, the abundance, peace,
paradise on earth. That's a big move to
lose if you believe in that. If your
life is about that and you're dedicated
to that, but but in addition, you have a
collective action problem that's really
important. So, let's suppose that I'm in
a Stalin regime with you. You're a
functionary and I'm a functionary. And
Stalin's collectivizing agriculture,
which means he's destroying the
productivity. Yeah.
And we're going to be poor all the way
through the Brev period. We're going to
be importing wheat, even though we have
this gigantic agricultural belt, wheat
belt.
Some people knew in real time that this
was self harm.
Yeah.
And I come to you and I say, "This
Stalin guy, he's wrecking everything. We
got to take him down." You agree with
me. But you know what? You don't know.
Maybe I've been sent by Stalin to test
your loyalty.
Maybe I'm provoking you to reveal your
disloyalty.
Maybe I'm not being sincere. So instead,
you agree with me, but instead of saying
yes, let's do it. Immediately, you run
to Stalin and you say that this Cotkin
guy is talking behind your back about
how we need to take you down because
you're going to preser
self-preservation. You're going to
preserve yourself because you don't
trust. There's a lack of trust,
right,
inside these dictatorships. If you knew
that Stalin hadn't sent me, for sure
100%.
You would say, you know, you're right.
You got a point there. What can we do
about this? But you know that Stalin is
constantly doing these provocations or
you suspect he is. And you know that
he's got people provocator who are
around the system doing things like
this. And the secret police are
listening in on your phone
conversations. and the driver of your
car works for Stalin, doesn't work for
you, and is reporting any overheard
conversations in the car, and the maid
in your apartment is also working for
the secret police and reporting up the
chain of command. So, the system that
you're in and meshes you in this
distrust, in this surveillance and
distrust. So what looks like gez let's
just take them down and save our own
life let alone save the the country
looks like yes it's logical but that's
not the kind of lives that they led. We
would think that based upon the kind of
lives in the system that we live in.
But there's a bunch of revolutionaries
who try to kill the sometimes succeed.
Um and they're just like random people.
They're not like people in the regime.
They're just random people. Uh yes. Why
does why doesn't a Koulak one of the 100
million enslaved people?
The Zar has less security than Stalin
does.
But didn't you say in the com that in
1928 he had like one bodyguard when he
would go to his dasha.
The bodyguard stuff increases over time,
right?
But the regime is walled off from the
people. Stalin doesn't go out in public.
He's not one of these populist types in
public who's bathing in the agilation of
the crowd.
He's in the office. He's at the DACA.
He's at the party meeting. He's at the
party congress.
And so he's not putting himself at risk,
right?
In these But even so, it is paradoxical
because when Hitler goes to make a
speech, every year Hitler makes a speech
in Munich.
Yeah.
Uh and it's known when he's going to
make the speech. It's announced in the
paper. There are a couple of
assassination attempts on Hitler. One of
which takes place in the hall where he's
going to do where someone plants a bomb.
Yeah.
It's a working-class guy plants a bomb
there and the bomb goes off. It blows
up. But Hitler left the hall uh more
quickly than anticipated
based on the schedule that people
thought he would be there longer. It was
quicker. He was out. And so the bomb
exploded and he survived. There are
military officials who try to kill
Hitler famously in 1944. They plant a
bomb under the table which also goes off
and almost gets him but doesn't get him
during a military briefing.
And so there are attempts on Hitler's
life both from the society and from
inside the regime. And Stalin doesn't
have this. In fact, the people inside
the regime are killing themselves. when
they see that Stalin is leading them
down a blind alley of murder and ration
tickets in gulag, they kill themselves
rather than kill Stalin. So again,
there's something special about the
mentality of these communists
and there's also something about
Stalin's success as well as the threat
that he represents to these individuals.
Still, it is mysterious because there
were opportunities and people didn't
take up the opportunities. The very few
I mean there's no serious assassination
attempt on Stalin. The very few times
when they accuse somebody of doing an
assassination,
for example, there were shots fired at a
boat when Stalin was on holiday uh in
the South. Uh it was not because Stalin
was in the boat. It was because the boat
was not in the system as marked as
allowed to use that waterway
and so they were just performing their
duties as border guards.
That's funny.
Shooting at the boat and it it got
dressed up as an assassination attempt
and people were arrested and executed
and it was publicized as such but they
didn't know that Stalin was in the boat.
Yeah. So you have you've written other
books about the collapse of the Soviet
Union.
Yeah.
And there's this last dish effort in the
Eastern block where there's falling
productivity to borrow more money,
invest more into finding this last ditch
technological miracle that can cure all
their problems. How similar is that in
your opinion to what's happening in
China? Because the the dissimilarity is
that while Eastern Europe was struggling
to export and they had a trade deficit,
China many people argue are exporting
too much. Uh do you see any similarity
between where Eastern Europe was in 1989
versus where China is today? Or is it
you're not as concerned about China
right now?
Uh it's a very difficult question to
answer very briefly but it's a really
important question. There are tremendous
differences of course civilizational
differences let alone system differences
and we wouldn't want to ally those
differences. What's similar is the
Marxist Leninist monopoly on power.
Yeah.
People ask me, is China a Marxist
Leninist regime?
And I usually say it's a Leninist regime
because that's undisputable,
right?
Do they believe in the Marxism or not?
People disagree on this. How many true
believers are there? Is Xi Jinping a
true believer? That's a difficult
argument to win because the evidence is
contradictory and because we don't know
the inside of the system. Well, it's
still in power. It hasn't fallen. But
it's clearly a Leninist system. And a
Leninist system can't be half pregnant.
You can't be half communist. You either
have a communist monopoly or you don't.
So what happens in communist political
reform, not economic reform, where they
allow some market behavior, but where
you liberalize the system and you open
it up politically. So you say, DK, okay,
let's have debate inside the party.
Let's allow pluralism inside the party's
rule. Meaning, we're going to keep the
party, but we're going to allow
different
tendencies in the party. The problem
with that is some wise raises their hand
and says, "I don't want the communist
party. I want a social democratic party
or I want a right-wing party or I want a
centrist party." And you say, "No, no,
no. That's not the rules here." The rule
is only debate within the party's
monopoly. Not that you can have another
party.
So what happens is there's no way for
them to open debate and then to put a
lid on the debate. It becomes a
Pandora's box.
You can't be half communist, half
monopoly. You either have the monopoly
or you don't.
So every time they liberalize
politically,
the system liquidates itself.
Hungary in 56, Czechoslovakia in ' 68
and Gorbachov. Had Gorbachoff not
happened, China might have done its own
Gorbachoff.
Had they not seen Gorbachoff
accidentally liquidate the party,
they might have done political reform,
opened up the party and watched the
thing unravel.
Yeah.
Or they would have had to crack down and
put the lid back on much bigger than the
Chan on Men episode in June 1989.
So they're not going to do political
reform because they know from studying
the Gorbachov case which everybody
studies in party school which is where
all the cadre have to go to be trained.
They're not going to open up the system
politically because that's suicide and
they're not going to commit suicide like
what happened with Gorbachev. So this
means their policy options their menu of
policy options is limited. They can open
up the economy, but if it gets too open
and too liberalized, too many people
with independent sources of power and
wealth, too many jacks, they lose
control potentially.
So they can open up the system
economically, but then they got to
somehow reimpose controls and but if
they reimpose too much controls, they
the GDP goes down and they don't have
the job creation. So you have this
constant back and forth of how much
economic liberalization
you can have before it becomes a threat
or how little economic liberalization
you can you can have before it becomes a
threat to your ability to create jobs
and wealth. So that's the dilemma
they're in. The Soviets in the 70s and
80s were looking at the system and they
didn't want to change the system
Gorbachoff style. They didn't want to
liberalize it politically. They were
willing to introduce some market
economic liberalization, some market
incentives.
They tried that in ' 65. It actually
didn't work. And anyway, then the Prague
Spring happened in ' 68 and scared the
be Jesus out of them. Reform looked like
the end of the system.
So, they tried a little bit of economic
liberalization. It didn't work.
They didn't want to open up the system
politically. So what's left?
Technological fantasies.
Yes.
Maybe technology can perfect planning so
all the pathologies of the planned
economy, all the inefficiencies of the
planned economy can be overcome with
computers. Maybe if we invest heavily in
tech, we don't have to do the hard
choices
of deep and fundamental structural
change, which would end our party's
monopoly. We can keep the party. We can
keep the party's monopoly. We can even
keep the state-owned economy, but we can
just tweak it with the tech and
supercharge it or even turbocharge it
and make it work that way. So computers
tech will save us from the hard choices
of deep structural reform which will
threaten our power.
Right?
We know how that worked. It didn't work.
Now you're looking at China today. You
have a Communist Party monopoly. You
can't be half pregnant. So you can't
open up politically.
So how you going to reintroduce the
dynamism? How you going to get the GDP
growth? How you going to get the job
creation? How you going to get the
societal buy in? Because if you go too
far in that direction, that could
threaten the regime. And if you don't go
far, so tech, we got tech. The tech can
make our dictatorship function better.
Not just our economy, our productivity,
our job creation,
managing through the demographic crisis.
Not just the economic and social
benefits from tech that tech could
deliver, but tech could maybe even make
our communist dictatorship immune from
challenges because of the surveillancees
all encompassing
because of our ability to spot things
before they happen. And so you can see
where they would be so seduced, so
tempted that tech is the solution.
Here's the problem with that argument.
First, it didn't work the last time.
That doesn't mean it won't work this
time, but the track record, even though
it's a small number of cases, is not
good. But the other problem is political
legitimacy.
You can't get political legitimacy.
You might have thought that, you know,
oh gez, if the GDP grows, that'll give
us the legitimacy. Then the GDP stops
growing and you no longer have the
economic benefits to claim that that's
why you're in power.
But do you need it? Like Stalin didn't
have strong growth in the 20s and 30s
and that it seems like you just double
down on repression. Like if you double
down on the NKBD.
Yeah.
Uh like the actually, you know, 2%
growth up till 1917. Huh.
They're dead. They're the point, right?
The growth.
They're dead and the system is gone. So
it's it's fundamentally a deficit of
political legitimacy. So when we talk
about, you know, Iran today and how
Russia and China didn't even help them
with any military support or economic
support while they're under tremendous
strain from Israel rolling back Iranian
power.
And so they kind of got betrayed by
their strategic partners. The strategic
partnership among the authoritarian
regimes is a fake. That's true. It is a
fake. They're out for themselves.
They're opportunistic and they will help
the others to the extent that they feel
it's helping for themselves. And the day
that they feel it's not helping
themselves, forget it. Right? But
there's a deeper problem there. What
Iranian regime needs is political
legitimacy. That's what it doesn't have.
It's not just a failure economically.
It's not just a failure in security in
its foreign policy terms. It's hated by
its own people. It's got maybe 20%
support in the population.
And a lot of people are indifferent, but
a majority of the people despise this
regime, want to see it go. They're
patriots for Iran, but they detest the
Mullis clerical regime. Neither Russia
nor China can give political legitimacy
to Iran. They can give dual use
technology. They can give them missiles.
They can give them uh anti-missile
defense. They can never give them
political legitimacy. And that's the
vulnerability which is why Iran is on
the precipice now because the regime is
illegitimate and the regime knows that
it's illegitimate in the eyes of the
people.
I guess we'd like to think that that's
the main thing that matters but uh
historically it just seems like when
authoritarians crack down really hard it
kind of just works right
that's why they have gigantic repressive
apparatuses. Yeah,
because people talk about a bargain. The
Chinese made a bargain or the Russians
made a bargain. The people gave up their
freedom and the regime provides a higher
standard of living. So there's this
bargain. There is no bargain because if
the regime fails to raise the standard
of living, the people can't sue them in
court.
Yeah.
They can't say, "Oh, you know, you
didn't live up to your end of the
bargain. We gave away our freedom, but
you didn't deliver on your part of the
bargain, so the deal's over.
you're out of power now because you
didn't live up to your bargain. Instead,
they repress. They bring out the batons.
They bring out the water cannon. They
they bring out the disappearances where
people are arrested and they're not even
arrested in cause. They're not even
indicted. They just disappear them. And
so, you have this huge repressive
apparatus and it seems to work
especially when you have this moment
where you fail to live up to some of the
promises that you made. The challenge
for them there is somebody has to do the
repression. The repressive apparatus is
not a machine. It's not AI.
It's not something which is mechanical.
It's people. It's people who grow up in
neighborhoods,
come from villages, went to the schools
with other people. This brings us back
to the Tsarist regime where we started.
The Zarus secret police wasn't big
enough to keep the lid on. So they had
to use the military. The military was a
peasant army.
They were peasants in uniform. And the
working class, including women, were
striking for bread in the capital and
marching in the capital for bread in
1917. And the military was told to shoot
them. And these are elite military
units. Shoot these workers. And they're
peasants. And you think, okay, peasants,
they'll shoot workers, right? No, have
lost. The workers were peasants.
yesterday and some of them were still
peasants who went back to the villages
where these soldiers were from during
downtime at the factory during harvest
time.
They were the same people and the army
decided not to shoot. There came a point
where the regime called out the
repression
and the repressors had agency and didn't
repress. And so that's what happens in
these cases. You never know when it's
going to happen. It's very hard to
predict beforehand.
But there comes a moment where the
people who are supposed to do the
shooting decide not to shoot. The people
who are supposed to do the arresting,
they decide not to arrest. The people
who are doing the surveillance, they
decide to stop.
So you have this huge repressive
apparatus and it works until the moment
the people in it decide not to do it
anymore. And so that's where the
political legitimacy variable is
ultimately decisive because those people
who are killing under communism and
delectivi and collectivizing those
villages and deculakizing and and
killing the people in their native
village that they had grown up with. If
they hadn't done that, the regime
couldn't have done this. The regime
couldn't have collectivized.
Stalin wasn't out there shooting people.
He was signing the decree which then got
transported through the system,
communicated through the system to the
point of the activist who enacted it or
not as the case might be. When they
don't enact your power evaporates like a
bank run,
right?
You look at the bank and you think,
"Wow, that's pretty solid. They got
these neocclassical columns.
It's all made out of stone. Looks really
impressive. this bank is really solid.
And then one day it gets in people's
heads that the bank might not have your
money.
The bank might not be good in reality
for your paper holdings. And so you rush
the bank to try to get your money out
before that money is gone or doesn't
exist. And everybody gets that idea at
the same time, not just one person. And
you get a bank run. And so this really
solid institution
with these neocclassical stone columns
turns out to be
van evaporates
effent. You can have a political bank
run in the repressive apparatus. They
cease thinking that they should kill
people like themselves
on behalf of a system that they are no
longer loyal to, no longer adhering to.
That can happen in the forces of order
as we call them in the repressive
apparatus. It can happen inside the
elite. That's cuz when the leader gives
the order, it's got to go through the
whole chain of command. The leader
doesn't give the order to the soldier.
It goes to the one boss, the subordinate
to that boss, the subordinate, and
anywhere along the chain of command,
there can be disloyalty and revolt.
There can be what we call political
defection. And so what motivates what
triggers political defection?
The lack of legitimacy, political
illegitimacy.
People are not going to die for
something that they no longer believe
in.
And so that's a really big problem that
the communist regime can't solve with
tech. And you say, well, the tech could
produce power and prosperity and China
could relegitimize its rule just like it
did with the economic growth. And so the
economic growth did it for 30, 40 years.
And that's how the regime legitimated
itself. And then the tech will do that
for the next 30, 40 years. The answer is
that hasn't happened yet. So maybe it
can do that and maybe it can't, but it's
never permanent.
What's permanent is power rooted in the
people. What's permanent is they're real
citizens. They have real freedoms.
They have the right to vote. Now, they
can't get what they want. They go to the
polls and they see bad candidate, worst
candidate, even worse candidate. But
they can punish what they don't like.
They can exercise that agency. They can
be citizens. they can realize their
citizenship just like we do as consumers
in the marketplace, consumers of
podcasts.
And so that's where you get legitimacy
from where the system enables people.
Opportunity at home, opportunity for
people who otherwise don't have
opportunity. That's legitimacy. That's
priceless. China doesn't have that.
Russia doesn't have that. Stalin had
that legitimacy for a time based upon
the idea that he was building a new
world and overcoming the horrors of
capitalism and imperialism and world
war. And Kruef gave a second wind to
that
even as he was revealing more of the
horrors and then that just ran out and
they unwittingly destroyed the system
trying to give it a third wind.
under Gorbachoff,
right?
And so they have no way forward. They're
stuck. They can't do structural reform
and maintain their power. But without
structural reform, without a legitimate
system, they also can't maintain their
power forever. So it's really
interesting. In the short run, we're all
dead because there could be a World War
II. But in the long run, we're all good
because our system is better. So we have
to get elongate the short run. No world
war between the US and China. Get to the
long run. Get to the competition. Get to
the cold war instead of hot war where
we're not having hot war. That's the
beauty of cold war. It's not hot war.
You can compete. You can have tensions.
You can have rivalries, but you don't
have hot war. And so in the short run
potentially we're all dead because a
world war with great powers. It was 55
million in World War II. The low
estimate of deaths. It's going to that
was a multiple of World War I and World
War II would be a multiple of World War
II. If we can avoid that in the long
run, we're good. It's the opposite of
what Keane said about in the long run
we're all dead. It's in the short run
that we're potentially dead. But I like
the long run. and and so the tech and
China thing might work and it might not
work, but it's not permanent even if it
does work.
All right, great note to close on. Um,
thank you so much for coming on the
podcast. It was a real pleasure to talk
to you.
My pleasure. I apologize for not being
succinct in my answers,
but if you've read some of my books, not
all of them,
some of them go on at length. Yes,
a few of them are short, though. and and
I I have to master the answers to
questions on podcasts in order to be
able to get through your whole
magnificent list. Maybe next time we'll
do better.
Yes. No, I the the the long the long run
um or the long draw down is why why we
uh why I want you on the podcast, right?
A lot of these issues are complicated.
So, uh I appreciate you doing it.
I hope you enjoyed this episode. If you
did, the most helpful thing you can do
is just share it with other people who
you think might enjoy it. Send it to
your friends, your group chats, Twitter,
wherever else. Just let the word go
forth. Other than that, super helpful if
you can subscribe on YouTube and leave a
fivestar review on Apple Podcast and
Spotify. Check out the sponsors in the
description below. If you want to
sponsor a future episode, go to
dwarcash.com/advertise.
Thank you for tuning in. I'll see you on
the next one.
[Music]